And since your voice level is there and everything, then just talk as you have been.
You are a, from what I can gather, a Donald Walheim discovery.
There have been a few other of those, but with the Dahl books, that's where your novels
were published.
How did you first get published by Donald Walheim?
Well, apparently I'm one of these fortunate real few.
I just sent out the little book in your basic brown paper wrapping to as many, one after
the other, to as many people as I could find in the writer's market.
And he was the first one to show interest.
And he sent, you know, he sent me a questionnaire to find out who it was and what it was doing
and said, you know, of course, this isn't any good sign of selling.
Then I'd written the second one in the series.
And I sent that off to him.
And since he decided, I suppose, that I was going to keep on producing, he sent me, bless
his heart, two typewritten pages, single spaced, with from top to bottom completely marvelous
criticism of the book as was.
So I rewrote it for the night time and sent it back and he bought it.
Was this the first science fiction book that you had written?
This first book I'd written.
How did you come to be a writer then and why science fiction of all things?
Well, for the first, I've been teaching for a number of years.
And I'm also an artist.
I draw a lot.
And I was much more interested in painting and drawing for my first years than it was in writing.
But I gradually came to see that while I have a gift for rendering, I can do quite good individual objects.
I don't have any field for design.
And I wasn't willing to take the trouble to get work for that field.
So I decided to remain in very much an amateur as a painter.
But having drawn that conclusion and being in a situation where I needed to get out,
I was about ready to bang my head against the walls.
I know one of your examples of teacher burnout.
And so I started writing as a way of breaking away from the job I was in.
And science fiction?
Well, because I've always loved it, because I thought I could write it.
And it is an awful lot of fun making up worlds.
It is an awful lot of fun.
Basically that's it.
I need the distance between me and the actual nitty-gritty reality, the sandpapering, the dominance of real things and real people to be able to create.
This seems like a logical place to ask this question, although I was going to ask it at the end.
The covers, since you are an artist, still are an artist.
I guess it's not good to say you were an artist.
The covers on the books are, I guess, in kind of the T&A school.
And I realized that probably the art director feels that's what sells books.
But are you satisfied with the covers?
Do you think they could have been done a little better?
Very nice.
Several of them I rather like.
Some of them I don't care for that much.
But, well, Don Wilhunt is his own art director and he has his own distinctive taste.
I haven't really been concerned that much with the covers.
There hasn't been one that I absolutely loathe.
I mean, you could stand them.
I think some of the covers that sell, Don seems to know that pretty well.
But they'll sell the first book.
But I think it's up to me to sell the second and the third and the fourth.
If they like what I write, it doesn't matter what cover you put on it.
Okay.
Now I'd like to explore the Diadem series since there have now been seven Diadem books published.
So, since this is a nice long series, it's very enjoyable when I might add.
How much of it did you have planned in advance?
I mean, there's a lot of things that have happened and you must have written the first book.
Could you telescope all the way down to the end and see where you wanted to take Alitas or is she developed along with you?
Well, yes and no.
It's like just about every one of the novels is right.
I know where I'm starting and I know my characters and I know my world.
In this case, it's a series of worlds.
And I know where I'm going, but how I'm going to get there develops.
I don't think I can write any other way.
I mean, it would be boring if I knew everything before I started.
For example, in Star Hunters, one of the secondary leads in it,
the woman who was more or less a toy or plaything,
the wife of one of the other secondary leads in the subplot,
is only supposed to be in there for about three pages or so.
But I suddenly got very interested in her or she got me interested in her
and she began to take over and she became a very important part of the book.
And this is totally, totally unexpected.
In the beginning, I meant to have Alitas reach her, find her mother and her family in...
Well, about the same as the number of books.
I think there'll be about nine in all.
I just finished one and turned it in.
I think that's the eighth.
And the next one will probably be the other last in that particular series,
dealing with Alitas as the main character.
Each book, I hope, shows makes Alitas a little bit more aware of who she is
and what she really wants rather than what she thought she wanted.
And in the end, she's going to end up, I hope,
satisfied with where she is working and living in that place for a while anyway.
So I knew I was going to have her to find her mother and her mother's world,
how I was going to get there, depending upon the inspiration and the desperation of the moment.
Alitas is quite an interesting character.
How much of Alitas is you?
Well, to be honest, every character in there, in every one of the books, good and bad, is me.
Because I'm the only real resource I have for in-depth knowledge of characters,
but she's also a lot of other people I've known.
She's... Her qualities are...
There's some women executives I've known, some teachers that I have known, some kids.
Mostly, most of them are very competent people I've known that go into her,
as well as my... anything incompetent or asinine, or the kind of thing that makes you bite your nails
when you think about it, that's probably me.
The first few books in the series really accented the diet,
and of course the reader has to gain an understanding of what that is.
But as the books progress, there is less and less said about how it functions and that sort of thing.
So that was modified. I guess that's the nice thing about a series.
You don't have to go back and explain every time what the point is here, folks.
Yeah. Well, I also am thinking of the series as my workshop in education and writing.
And the concepts I might have had in the beginning...
I'm not going to stick with them. I'll modify the vast necessary as I learn more about my craft.
More and more, in the last books, I hope the character of the people who are trapped in the diet is coming through.
And as they come out, or achieve, or re-embodied, or whatever you want to call it,
they become more and more real to me and more important than the diet in itself.
Also, I said before that I was in a situation where I was really banging my head against the wall.
I was teaching English, you know, and while this is very important, there were so many things happening to my kids.
I guess I got too involved with them that I was totally helpless to alleviate things that...
you know, with the pressures on them, the wounds that they got from them, with the world around them.
That I was just absolutely useless in helping them live through.
Only I created perhaps a character that was, in the end, a little bit too powerful, too able to go to...
Well, magic are way out of things, so I had to create problems for her and help her come to an understanding of the limitations of power.
Which I guess is one of the one of the themes in... if there are themes in what I'm writing.
Yeah, I enjoy the aspect in that she discovers the power in the first few books, and then she's comfortable with it,
and then she uses it, and she's not discovering new things about it all the time,
other than that we get to know the people trapped in the Diadem much better.
I guess I should ask you here, how did Aletus evolve?
Did you conceive of Aletus and then the Diadem, or did the idea of the Diadem hit you, and then Aletus is the character that naturally arose?
Well, Aletus was the character, first of all.
Actually, the first image that hit me was that first page of the first book.
I just got this feeling for something suddenly, and...
Ranking into the world that she knew, the crash of the ship of the thief, he was also one of the first characters that came up with.
I could see him in his flight.
Well, I see these things... you know, once I get to know them, they're...
I'm a very visual person there.
This little movie screen in the front of my head that goes through.
But those are the things that came, first of all, the picture of the thief in flight, I didn't know what he had stolen,
the crashing on the world, I didn't know what that crash meant, and slowly building up complications.
I like complications.
Yes, you do, from the writing.
I want to talk about a couple of things in the books that caught my eyes.
I read them.
One thing in La Marcos, which I read right after my daughter was born,
and I particularly enjoyed the descriptions of Aletus and her son when he was a baby,
because I had a baby at the same time and could see how accurate that was, and I was really amazed at that.
And then that's the book.
You kind of use the technique of leaving us up in the air at the end where she had been captured by the...
I was going to ask you to pronounce what she had been captured by.
I never could decide, but I was particularly taken with the descriptions of the relationship between the mother and the baby at the time.
Well, just a few months before this, my sister had had her first son, and I'd been there, you know, to...
The first time I'd ever been around a baby, that's little.
And I helped her take care of the baby a bit, and she nursed him, of course.
And, well, you know, it's just a...
Everything that we know can be expanded into other things.
Like, I like... I don't know if this will sound up or down or not, but I like small furry animals.
And I could see that in a very fundamental way.
My feeling for small furry animals could be applied to...
I'd love to pat and hold and, you know, that kind of thing, could be applied to a mother and her child,
so that I knew that part of it from the inside and from the outside.
I saw how my sister and her baby were relating.
I figured... I am glad to hear that it was from observation, because I felt so helpless at the time.
And, of course, my wife knew more than I did, but I really did.
In Maeve, and correct me if I'm pronouncing these wrongs, a lot of these words I've never pronounced out loud, it's always mentally...
I really feel that I'm cooperating with my readers.
And anybody... I have my own vision of what Alitas looks like and all the characters look like, and I have my own way of pronouncing them.
Maeve is, you know, quite as good as any of them. That's how I always call it.
But, anyway, I figured that anyone who reads it can pronounce it any way they like.
Okay, here, here.
Okay, in Maeve, Alitas runs into Gray, who figures heavily in a couple of other books.
And he's the company man. And that was an interesting transition for me to see her as feeling as though she weren't outlawed and hated the company.
And then she became part of the company.
Is that something that occurred to you later on in the series?
No, I guess, to be honest, this is one of my prejudices coming out.
But I never saw the hunters as a company as such.
I saw them more as an association of individuals, a very, very primidana individual, in a lot of ways, so that they don't get together with this sort of corporate consciousness that I felt in many of the big companies.
So, in a sense, she's never been reconciled to the way that the companies operate.
Also the fact that while it is, I guess you're right, it is a company, it does not deal that directly with the exploitation of worlds.
It only comes in as a troubleshooter and as a wielder of expertise.
And I very quickly got her so that she could pick and choose as much as possible her own hunts.
So that if something was really, smelled rotten to her, she would just say, forget it.
And then the Star Hunters was the first book in which she was a hunter.
And that kind of allows you to go off on a little bit different tangent.
She or she wants to find her mother's world and her mother.
But this gives her something interesting to do in the meantime.
Well, it's not only that, it's her road to get there.
You know, I supported myself since I was 17.
And I have a very, one of the things that has bothered me about a lot of, well, not a lot, but some of the books I've read, which I've enjoyed in other ways,
is people just don't seem to have that much trouble getting from place to place.
You know, they pick up the money or they already have their spaceships or whatever.
And I always thought that she really needs a good, believable way of getting from world to world.
You know, she's going to have to work quite hard to do this in a lot of ways.
So that Hunters was my way of eventually helping her to survive, getting her from world to world.
And eventually getting her ship.
Some things I've read in economics and so on, spaceships are not going to be cheap things ever,
even in the distant future where, you know, they seem to be hopping all over the place.
You can see what it takes, it takes the whole nation to provide our first spaceship, the shuttle.
So I figured that she is going to have to, well, have a way, she's not going to steal it,
of acquiring herself transportation, a transportation that can free her from dependence upon other people.
And that's what she's basically gone into Hunters for.
Also, it has developed, I hadn't intended her to stay there that long,
but it has developed as a place where she can have friends and slowly begin to insert herself into the life of the world,
rather than being the total loner always.
I know she got kind of lonesome.
Understandably so.
The Know-Where Hunt, now I'm a chemist, I'm not an English professor or anything,
but I enjoy books from a literature point of view.
But to me, the Know-Where Hunt introduced, this was maybe a more, not more sophisticated necessarily,
but a different style where you use the alternate points of view of Aletus and Rohan.
Is this your experimenting with this kind of presentation?
Yeah, well, you see, each one, it's a very cautious experimentation.
The one after that, the Ghost Hunt, is much more experimental and leaps about a bit more.
It's kind of jerky actually.
I mean, it leaps from point to point and point of view to point of view and writing style quite a bit more than the Know-Where Hunt.
But, yeah, I was always trying out something new, trying to look at things from several sides at once,
or at least two sides at once, and contrasting viewpoints, using each view, Aletus's view point as the outsider,
and the little witch girl or whatever it is, Rohan, I forgot your name now.
I called it Ro-Hi-R-O-H-A.
Yeah, using her point, it's the one who is totally immersed within her society,
and besides, it was a lot of fun developing that society.
Yeah, that was quite a complicated society.
Then, of course, the twist in that book was that Swarhilt was released.
Had you always intended to release these poor people?
No. Actually, I got the idea on here, and I figured I was going to get it off her somehow.
But, I was wondering if there was a little... I went for a walk and I suddenly said,
hey, what if?
And so, when I just finished, they bought, probably out in about a year, called Trek Across Ibex.
The second one comes out.
Shadith the singer gains herself a 14-year-old body,
and she's going to continue as poet and singer.
And I figure on her adventures on after a while.
She's a very interesting little person.
But, no, I didn't intend that.
I didn't even think about that when I started,
but those energy creatures or whatever, the big bubble things that kept getting together,
they sort of, as I thought them up, I said, huh,
you know, they suck the life out of you and turn you into a vegetable, maybe.
And that sort of worked it out.
It was, as I said, very interesting.
And then, it made the relationship between the two of them much more complicated
as it had been before, and as I said, the complications are what I like.
Okay.
I should think, I'll just make an editorial statement here,
I should think that Alitas, after the die-dim,
Dwellers are gone would be an interesting person to write about too.
Yeah, I'm going to leave her for a while though.
I've got something very sneaky worked out, I hope, if I use it,
for the sorceress who was the original captive of the die-dim.
And once she's out, the whole thing falls off and Alitas is free.
There isn't this little time bomb that I've given Alitas though,
the fact that she's possibly, or at least close to immortal,
or at least very long-lived as compared to the people around her,
which makes it possible later on to jerk her out of the society
that she's going to have her home in for a while.
And perhaps I'll do something more with her,
having to face the decision to leave, you know,
and then what she's going to do for men.
It's interesting, I don't know, it depends on whether I'm too involved in other things.
It takes me a long time to write these things, you know, about three years each,
but then I'm writing about three or four at the same time,
so overlapping them at different stages, you know.
Ghost Hunt then came along, and as you mentioned,
it does have perhaps the more trying form of writing,
which was from three points of view.
And this one was the first one, and if I recall,
that was kind of an urban setting.
It was an adventure science fiction.
She didn't get raped and beat up and all that, and beat up on.
And this, again, is something different for you.
Just more experimenting, more expanding your writing.
Yep.
And the next one the woman was talking about,
the Trek Across Ibex is your basic Trek story,
we cross the world and get back again.
And I've done something different in that one too.
I've been thrown in some fairy tales, sort of, stories,
which I'm probably going to do more of.
The one I'm working on right now, the third in the trilogy,
the Dula Sorcery trilogy, is you're talking about different points of view.
I've got, I've been writing what is basically four novelettes
with four viewpoint characters and writing them all separately,
just about finished with those, next week or the week after.
I'm going to start braiding them all together.
It's been fascinating.
I'll try, I'm playing them off against each other,
looking for echoes and all sorts of chimes and heightened suspense
and contrast, you know, and all of this kind of thing,
leading up to the final battle.
But four very, very different characters, female characters.
So it's going to be a complicated book too.
This is, again, this is a question I was going to ask at the end,
but it's a good place to bring it up.
I empathize with this completely, but Alitas really likes to be clean
and take a bath, and it drives her nuts to be all yucky
and all that out in the wilderness.
And that's one thing I've really enjoyed because it makes her feel
such, such like a real person.
Well, I grew up on a farm.
And after you've exercised a lot, and this is a farm in California
where it's, they spend about a month in the San Joaquin Valley.
They go, sort of, going between 100 and 108.
If you've ever worked on a farm, hoeing weeds or plowing or whatever,
you know, picking watermelon or anything like this,
you'll know that the first thing you head for when you come in
is a bath because you stink.
And you are dirty, and you have, you're covered with dust
and pollen and, oh, it's just miserable.
And also, I've done a lot about backpacking into mountains
and capping up on myself, too.
And if you are away from water a few days,
that first touch of the, even the icy cold water is bliss.
There's a lot of me in that, too.
Okay. I have a quote, a two-sentence quote that I want to read
and ask you something about it.
This is from Ghost Tundin.
This is the chapter in which Tamrus and Elidas are meeting all the people on the planet.
And the quote is,
Tamrus stretched, scratched her nose and grinned at what she'd written.
All the description wasn't especially necessary, but it was fun to write.
Was that you talking, really?
Of course. Yes, yes.
It is.
The writing I find more and more difficult, as I get, I guess,
know a bit more about it.
But it never stops being fun, especially the first parts
where you're just scratching down notes,
where you're making up descriptions, where you're looking down names,
you're making up myths and constellations
and maps and putting together societies.
It's fun.
It's playing a game in a way that nobody else in the world is going to ever play it.
And when you get down to the hard, slugging work of putting it all together,
at least first draft, why, that's what keeps you going through it.
And of course, I've heard a lot of people complain about rewriting,
but I love rewriting.
This is when you begin to play with the words and you get the cadences
and you get the sentences to read smoothly and you get the effects that you want.
This is the fun time.
You've already got all that material and now you're messing with it.
But that's why it takes so long to write a book, right?
Yeah. If I were really efficient and sometimes my little country,
Puritan work ethic background gets on to me,
I would try to do it all first draft, but forget it.
That's too much fun doing the playing.
It also means that I'm not very organized.
Well, as a reader, your effort is well appreciated.
Especially in that part of the book with the description all in the names,
it really reminded me quite a bit of Jack Vance, which to me is the ultimate compliment.
Very much. Yes, I agree.
I look back and a lot of that was not necessary, but I was enjoying myself.
So I figured maybe the reader would too.
Yes, point well made.
The critics like your books generally.
They're a few picky, but by and large they really like them.
And the one thing they all say, where they like them or not,
is that your characters are strong and good and believable.
And this is different from most science fiction because it's not generally considered to be a character literature
and it's the reason I particularly like your works.
So from what you said, the characters really mean a lot to you.
There's part of you in them and you really work hard on them.
Oh, yes. Yes.
Actually, as I go on, I've come to the understanding that this is the kind of book I like to read.
For example, I just finished two mainstream novels that I really enjoyed very much,
and that's principally because of the characters.
And that was John Cowell's Daniel Martin, which is a book about a writer in a way, which I found fascinating.
He's marvelous with characters, especially women.
And John Gardner's Melon, Mickelson's Ghost, which was also had a very strong and to me interesting character in it.
And I'm trying to go deeper and deeper into my characters as the more I write.
That seems, as I said, to be the things that I'm really most interested in.
Who these people are and why they do it.
The rest is fun, but this is serious.
The characters are serious as far as I'm concerned.
You also, though, the settings are very rich and they're varied from book to book.
You have an efficacy with languages.
The aliens are believable, so it's not just all your characters.
Well, like I said, that's where the artist side comes in.
There are a lot of writers who have artists in avocations rather than their vocations.
Because it is the artist's eye.
You begin when you look at things, when you learn to look at things as an artist,
you look at things in terms of shape and form.
And also each thing is individual.
Each thing has its own form, its own shape.
Each blade of grass in a certain sort of way, each leaf, each tree is very, very individual.
It's one way to avoiding cliché.
If you see things clearly enough and if they are individual enough,
it's impossible to write in clichés or try to overuse language, I think.
Okay, to review Elitist then, you've got a couple of more...
You're planning on a couple of more books with Elitist and the die-dem,
and then you'll just kind of drop back and punt and see what develops with Elitist or those characters.
Right, I think so.
With Elitist for sure.
I just about got her, so I know her so thoroughly that I don't have any more stories for her.
I won't have after this next one.
So I'm going to leave her for a while, at least a while.
Maybe forever, I don't know.
That depends.
And go on in other directions.
I like long series, but not long, long.
I like closed-in series, you know, the finite series,
where you eventually come to some resolution, otherwise it just starts getting old.
And I think what would happen is if I kept on writing about her,
I would start writing in formula, and I would get very distressed for myself for that.
I've been very, very fortunate in that they sold, the books have sold well enough,
and Don keeps, Wilhelm keeps buying them, for which I thank him,
that I've been able to do each one as a thing in itself, individual in itself,
following no formulas, following nothing before the story goes and where the character goes.
And that's a blessing, and I don't want to give it up.
So it's going to be very much a shut series.
Okay, I want to switch now to the What's Been Criss And I Guess The Duel Of Sorcery series.
The first question I'll ask you is, why did you switch from science fiction to fantasy?
Oh, because the park road sat down beside me one day.
That is the literal truth.
It's one of these huge ones, about three inches long, and I'm sitting here,
you know, I told you I lived in this little place, little shotgun apartment above a private house,
and I'm sitting on the steps, waiting for the mailman to come.
It's the thing I do, you know, riders do.
And this cockroach came crawling down the side of the house, and it sat there and it looked at me.
And, you know, your first reaction with the cockroach is, smash it.
But I decided just to sit here and look at it, and it's really, it's just being a little creature.
Actually, it's kind of pretty in its way.
Very nice lines, very bright black eyes, low, little alert.
And it just sat there and we looked at each other for a while.
And so I decided to write a story about a cockroach, and I decided that it's going to be fantasy.
It seemed to fit in fantasy, so that cockroach ended up, I believe,
with about ten pages out of 300 or something like that.
But he was in there, he was by inspiration.
And I don't know, he just felt like writing fantasy.
It wasn't any great momentous decision, it's just the way it turned out.
Now that you've written, or at least have published all of two fantasy books
and what the obvious sequel coming out, is it any different to write fantasy
since it's a little more freewheeling, you're a little bit less limited by the rules,
or do you find it to be that way?
Well, I am one of those who really believes that there are rules to magic.
I don't believe in magic at all, but it's fun to play with.
It's sort of an extension of the psionics, which is probably present, is not a science either.
Might be, but many people are skeptical about that.
But I can't, it is just the same thing in a sense as writing science fiction.
Only you write in other terms the same kind of rulekeeping.
And the societies, you can play with visual things and possibilities in a different way.
It's not more loose than science fiction, if you do it properly, I think.
It just has a different set of assumptions, and it's fun to play with those assumptions.
Sarah Wee? Is that how it's pronounced?
Sarah Wee.
Okay, I really butchered that.
You want, like I said.
Sarah Wee. Okay, I prefer to pronounce it.
No.
Just as you do.
Okay, Sarah Wee.
Maybe I'll adopt that.
I like that.
Well, my daughter's name is Sarah, so it kind of, it made me think about it like that.
She's a bit like Alitas.
She's a cast-off, and she's a strong female character.
They both have red hair.
They didn't have happy childhoods.
That seems to be something that you've come back to again.
Yeah, well, my own childhood was extremely happy.
But I've taught at inner-city schools for something like 14 years.
I did, and happy childhoods were the exception.
Also, they explain a lot of things, too.
Things that go wrong for people, unhappy childhoods do.
I suppose it's a, I'm going to have to think about that a bit, because you're right.
Maybe it's because of the outsider idea, whether there's so much than the unhappiness.
Because, as I said, mine was a very happy childhood.
We'd live on the farm, and we worked hard.
But again, we're a very close family, but I'm very much an outsider from a lot of you points myself.
So I suppose that's going to show up again and again in all of my female characters.
They are the people who look on, who interact, but then step away from a lot.
You know, I, I, I, that probably came from the same source.
You're right.
You mentioned strong female characters, then.
Do you plan to continue writing, mainly with female characters as the lead protagonist, anyway?
Yeah, because I know a woman from the inside out, you know, from under the skin out.
And that's one of the things I'm interested in.
Although I'm, you know, I might, just as a trial, a trial with a male character as the lead, it would be much harder for me.
I suppose that's why so many, when they were all men writing, there were so many boys and men main characters.
It's simply easier.
That's one of the reasons I keep writing short stories, because I can't do it.
So I'm very stubborn about that kind of thing.
So I probably end up one of these days using, having a male character as the main character.
Maybe we'll book with all men in it, rather than, as one of my favorite books is,
Oh dear.
Have you ever had this block in the back of your head?
Many times.
Motherlines, Motherlines.
By Dennis Susie Charnes, where she had a book with all females in it.
I might try the opposite thing, but I don't know.
There are a lot of small cultural things that I know about being women together that I probably wouldn't know about being men together.
Not only just the outside feelings, but the way people relate to each other,
and the way people react to stimulus.
In our culture and in other cultures, women and men do this differently.
Perhaps because it's something innate, but perhaps it's something that is cultural.
But it is also something that's very important to me in creating the characters.
So I don't know.
They'll probably be mostly female.
I wanted to ask you a bit about the mechanics of writing Moongather,
since it was written in alternate chapters, The Woman and the Child.
I'm curious, how do you do this mechanically?
Do you write The Woman all the way through, and The Child all the way through,
and then chop it up, or do you actually write it in the sequence in which it was published?
I read a lot of it in the sequence in which it was published.
There are a lot of things, I guess, private to me, because people haven't noticed them,
that one section would suggest to me to put into the next section.
So the book, strangely enough, was written in the order in which it eventually turned out,
although it changed a great deal.
If you saw my first draft, you wouldn't even recognize the book.
They changed so much in between drafts.
Things become multi-layered instead of straightforward.
It's what time and drafting does for me.
Another thing you write from the perspective of a woman,
because that's what you know better, and I certainly understand that,
but you also write well from the perspective of a child, and we're all children once,
but not everybody remembers that, and that also would require putting yourself
what was it like back then in remembering.
You also have to remember, though, that I've been a teacher for a number of years,
and I've dealt with children, not young, young children, actually.
I could be the youngest of the seventh graders, but I spent a lot of time,
especially the last six years, with my teaching, with kids,
and getting to know them pretty well.
So they're...the way they react...
I've gotten an awful lot of material from my teaching days.
There's enough there about human nature and about reaction to last me for a hundred years.
It's very difficult to write and teach at the same time,
because both are very exhausting procedures.
You come home from school so tired that it's almost impossible sometimes
to pick up the pencil or the pen, because I write all my first drafts with a pen.
Not the typewriter, I can't do it on typewriter.
But it also is invaluable teaching you how people work together
and how they don't work together, giving you insights into character and so on.
Actually, I'd recommend to any writer that they teach a couple of years.
A lot of people, a lot of science fiction writers have,
but once they start really seriously writing, they'll have to stop teaching.
It's just too exhausting.
So you don't teach right now?
No, actually I was fortunate enough before I went crazy to be able to quit.
I just sold the fourth book and I sold everything I'd written since I started.
So I figured that was a reasonably good sign, and so I said,
oh well, let's quit this, and I did.
Will you take the Duel of Sorcery?
It's presumably a trilogy now.
Are you going to take it further or use that same milieu for adventures?
I will probably use the same milieu.
One of the things I find in making up these worlds and the cultures,
I get so much information that I can't use in the stories.
That I have a lot of stuff left over and it's available for use with other stories.
So I'm probably going to use the milieu.
Maybe move the culture a couple of hundred years in the future
and start off from there and see what happens.
I'm going to have one hell of a mix-up at the end of this Changes Moon,
which is the next one.
That's the one I'm working on now.
It's got the four character viewpoints.
It's going to have a marvelous battle in me,
and it's going to have one hell of a magic scene in the Two Sides meet.
It's going to be sad.
Good future, good future.
Oh no, okay.
Okay, listen, that's the end of my questions.
I didn't hit on the short stories,
but I don't read as many short stories as I should.
I work for a living and I have to draw on the line somewhere,
so I don't read very many short stories.
But I really enjoy your novels, particularly the Elitists.
I'm more of a science fiction than a fantasy.
I like it.
And I really look forward to seeing what's coming out.
Okay, I hope you enjoy them.
By the way, one of the things that I really want people to do is just enjoy them.
I have loved to read since I was four years old.
It's one of the things I try to teach my kids to do when I was teaching them.
Just to plain love to read.
Now, that's what I want people to do with when I write.
Just enjoy the hell out of them.
They are very enjoyable.
Let me ask you a favor of sorts.
I'm a book collector.
Could I possibly get my books autographed by you?
If I send you the books and the return postage and all that.
Okay, fine.
Would that be any problem?
No, probably not.
Okay, great.
Just the address that I use to contact you.
That's the one on IrishV.
Great, I appreciate it.
That kind of makes this special to kind of cap it off.
Enjoy your work immensely.
That's the reason I want to interview you.
And we'll get you the tapes when we get them made.
And as I said, it'll be the fall and I'll get you my books.
And thank you and thank you for the interview.
Okay, this is fun.
Very nice.
Thanks again.
Bye-bye now.